---
acquired_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_via: docling
expert: unix-expert
priority: P1
quality_grade: A
slug: ch15s04
subcategory: unix
tags:
- unix
title: Ch15S04
word_count: 3262
---

<div class="navheader">

| make: Automating Your Recipes |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="ch15s03.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | Chapter 15. Tools |  <a href="ch15s05.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="sect1" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

## <span id="id2986448"></span>*make*: Automating Your Recipes

</div>

</div>

Program sources by themselves don't make an application. The way you put
them together and package them for distribution matters, too. Unix
provides a tool for semi-automating these processes; make(1). *Make* is
covered in most introductory Unix books. For a really thorough
reference, you can consult *Managing Projects with Make*
\[[Oram-Talbot](apb.html#Oram-Talbot "[Oram-Talbot]")\]. If you're using
*GNU make* (the most advanced make, and the one normally shipped with
open-source Unixes) the treatment in *Programming with GNU Software*
\[[Loukides-Oram](apb.html#Loukides-Oram "[Loukides-Oram]")\] may be
better in some respects. Most Unixes that carry *GNU make* will also
support GNU Emacs; if yours does you will probably find a complete make
manual on-line through Emacs's *info* documentation system.

Ports of *GNU make* to DOS and Windows are available from the
FSF<span id="id2986540" class="indexterm"></span>.

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2986550"></span>Basic Theory of *make*

</div>

</div>

If you're developing in C<span id="id2986564" class="indexterm"></span>
or C++<span id="id2986572" class="indexterm"></span>, an important part
of the recipe for building your application will be the collection of
compilation and linkage commands needed to get from your sources to
working binaries. Entering these commands is a lot of tedious detail
work, and most modern development environments include a way to put them
in command files or databases that can automatically be re-executed to
build your application.

Unix's make(1) program, the original of all these facilities, was
designed specifically to help C programmers manage these recipes. It
lets you write down the dependencies between files in a project in one
or more ‘makefiles’. Each makefile consists of a series of
<span class="emphasis">*productions*</span>; each one tells *make* that
some given target file depends on some set of source files, and says
what to do if any of the sources are newer than the target. You don't
actually have to write down all dependencies, as the *make* program can
deduce a lot of the obvious ones from filenames and extensions.

For example: You might put in a makefile that the binary `myprog`
depends on three object files `myprog.o`, `helper.o`, and `stuff.o`. If
you have source files `myprog.c`, `helper.c`, and `stuff.c`, *make* will
know without being told that each `.o` file depends on the corresponding
`.c` file, and supply its own standard recipe for building a `.o` file
from a `.c` file.

<div class="blockquote">

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
|   | Make originated with a visit from Steve Johnson (author of *yacc*, etc.), storming into my office, cursing the Fates that had caused him to waste a morning debugging a correct program (bug had been fixed, file hadn't been compiled, **cc \*.o** was therefore unaffected). As I had spent a part of the previous evening coping with the same disaster on a project I was working on, the idea of a tool to solve it came up. It began with an elaborate idea of a dependency analyzer, boiled down to something much simpler, and turned into Make that weekend. Use of tools that were still wet was part of the culture. Makefiles were text files, not magically encoded binaries, because that was the Unix ethos: printable, debuggable, understandable stuff. |   |
| --<span class="attribution"> <span class="author">Stuart Feldman</span> <span id="id2986733" class="indexterm"></span> </span> |  |   |

</div>

When you run **make** in a project directory, the *make* program looks
at all productions and timestamps and does the minimum amount of work
necessary to make sure derived files are up to date.

You can read a good example of a moderately complex makefile in the
sources for *fetchmail*<span id="id2986806" class="indexterm"></span>.
In the subsections below we'll refer to it again.

Very complex makefiles, especially when they call subsidiary makefiles,
can become a source of complications rather than simplifying the build
process. A now-classic warning is issued in *Recursive Make Considered
Harmful*.<sup>\[<a href="ch15s04.html#ftn.id2986827" id="id2986827">136</a>\]</sup>
The argument in this paper has become widely accepted since it was
written in 1997, and has come near to reversing previous community
practice.

No discussion of make(1) would be complete without an acknowledgement
that it includes one of the worst design botches in the history of Unix.
The use of tab characters as a required leader for command lines
associated with a production means that the interpretation of a makefile
can change drastically on the basis of invisible differences in
whitespace.

<div class="blockquote">

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
|   | Why the tab in column 1? Yacc was new, Lex was brand new. I hadn't tried either, so I figured this would be a good excuse to learn. After getting myself snarled up with my first stab at Lex, I just did something simple with the pattern newline-tab. It worked, it stayed. And then a few weeks later I had a user population of about a dozen, most of them friends, and I didn't want to screw up my embedded base. The rest, sadly, is history. |   |
| --<span class="attribution"> <span class="author">Stuart Feldman</span> <span id="id2986876" class="indexterm"></span> </span> |  |   |

</div>

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2986902"></span>*make* in Non-C/C++ Development

</div>

</div>

*make* is not just useful for C/C++ recipes, however. Scripting
languages like those we described in
[Chapter 14](languageschapter.html "Chapter 14. Languages") may not
require conventional compilation and link steps, but there are often
other kinds of dependencies that make(1) can help you with.

Suppose, for example, that you actually generate part of your code from
a specification file, using one of the techniques from
[Chapter 9](generationchapter.html "Chapter 9. Generation"). You can use
*make* to tie the spec file and the generated source together. This will
ensure that whenever you change the spec and remake, the generated code
will automatically be rebuilt.

It's quite common to use makefile productions to express recipes for
making documentation as well as code. You'll often see this approach
used to automatically generate PostScript or other derived documentation
from masters written in some markup language (like HTML or one of the
Unix document-macro languages we'll survey in
[Chapter 18](documentationchapter.html "Chapter 18. Documentation")). In
fact, this sort of use is so common that it's worth illustrating with a
case study.

<div class="sect3" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

#### <span id="id2986982"></span>Case Study: *make* for Document-File Translation

</div>

</div>

In the fetchmail<span id="id2986998" class="indexterm"></span> makefile,
for example, you'll see three productions that relate files named `FAQ`,
`FEATURES`, and `NOTES` to HTML sources `fetchmail-FAQ.html`,
`fetchmail-features.html`, and `design-notes.html`.

The HTML files are meant to be accessible on the fetchmail Web page, but
all the HTML markup makes them uncomfortable to look at unless you're
using a browser. So the `FAQ`, `FEATURES`, and `NOTES` are flat-text
files meant to be flipped through quickly with an editor or pager
program by someone reading the *fetchmail* sources themselves (or,
perhaps, distributed to FTP sites that don't support Web access).

The flat-text forms can be made from their HTML masters by using the
common open-source program lynx(1). *lynx* is a Web browser for
text-only displays; but when invoked with the `-dump` option it
functions reasonably well as an HTML-to-ASCII formatter.

With the productions in place, the developer can edit the HTML masters
without having to remember to manually rebuild the flat-text forms
afterwards, secure in the knowledge that `FAQ`, `FEATURES`, and `NOTES`
will be properly rebuilt whenever they are needed.

</div>

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2987148"></span>Utility Productions

</div>

</div>

Some of the most heavily used productions in typical makefiles don't
express file dependencies at all. They're ways to bundle up little
procedures that a developer wants to mechanize, like making a
distribution package or removing all object files in order to do a build
from scratch.

<div class="blockquote">

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
|   | Non-file productions were intentional and in there from day one. ‘Make all’ and ‘clean’ were my own conventions from earliest days. One of the older Unix jokes is “Make love” which results in “Don't know how to make love”. |   |
| --<span class="attribution"> <span class="author">Stuart Feldman</span> <span id="id2987177" class="indexterm"></span> </span> |  |   |

</div>

There is a well-developed set of conventions about what utility
productions should be present and how they should be named. Following
these will make your makefile much easier to understand and use.

<div class="variablelist">

<span class="term">`all`</span>  
Your `all` production should make every executable of your project.
Usually the `all` production doesn't have an explicit rule; instead it
refers to all of your project's top-level targets (and, not
accidentally, documents what those are). Conventionally, this should be
the first production in your makefile, so it will be the one executed
when the developer types **make** with no argument.

<span class="term">`test`</span>  
Run the program's automated test suite, typically consisting of a set of
unit
tests<sup>\[<a href="ch15s04.html#ftn.id2987288" id="id2987288">137</a>\]</sup>
to find regressions, bugs, or other deviations from expected behavior
during the development process. The ‘test’ production can also be used
by end-users of the software to ensure that their installation is
functioning correctly.

<span class="term">`clean`</span>  
Remove all files (such as binary executables and object files) that are
normally created when you **make all**. A **make clean** should reset
the process of building the software to a good initial state.

<span class="term">`dist`</span>  
Make a source archive (usually with the tar(1) program) that can be
shipped as a unit and used to rebuild the program on another machine.
This target should do the equivalent of depending on **all** so that a
**make dist** automatically rebuilds the whole project before making the
distribution archive — this is a good way to avoid last-minute
embarrassments, like not shipping derived files that are actually needed
(like the flat-text `README` in *fetchmail*, which is actually generated
from an HTML source).

<span class="term">`distclean`</span>  
Throw away everything but what you would include if you were bundling up
the source with **make dist**. This may be the the same as **make
clean** but should be included as a production of its own anyway, to
document what's going on. When it's different, it usually differs by
throwing away local configuration files that aren't part of the normal
**make all** build sequence (such as those generated by autoconf(1);
we'll talk about autoconf(1) in
[Chapter 17](portabilitychapter.html "Chapter 17. Portability")).

<span class="term">`realclean`</span>  
Throw away everything you can rebuild using the makefile. This may be
the same as **make distclean**, but should be included as a production
of its own anyway, to document what's going on. When it's different, it
usually differs by throwing away files that are derived but (for
whatever reason) shipped with the project sources anyway.

<span class="term">`install`</span>  
Install the project's executables and documentation in system
directories so they will be accessible to general users (this typically
requires root privileges). Initialize or update any databases or
libraries that the executables require in order to function.

<span class="term">`uninstall`</span>  
Remove files installed in system directories by **make install** (this
typically requires root privileges). This should completely and
perfectly reverse a **make install**. The presence of an uninstall
production implies a kind of humility that experienced Unix hands look
for as a sign of thoughtful design; conversely, not having an uninstall
production is at best careless, and (when, for example, an installation
creates large database files) can be quite rude and thoughtless.

</div>

Working examples of all the standard targets are available for
inspection in the *fetchmail*<span id="id2987604"
class="indexterm"></span> makefile. By studying all of them together you
will see a pattern emerge, and (not incidentally) learn much about the
*fetchmail* package's structure. One of the benefits of using these
standard productions is that they form an implicit roadmap of their
project.

But you need not limit yourself to these utility productions. Once you
master *make*, you'll find yourself more and more often using the
makefile machinery to automate little tasks that depend on your project
file state. Your makefile is a convenient central place to put these;
using it makes them readily available for inspection and avoids
cluttering up your workspace with trivial little scripts.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2987644"></span>Generating Makefiles

</div>

</div>

One of the subtle advantages of Unix *make* over the dependency
databases built into many IDEs is that makefiles are simple text files —
files that can be generated by programs.

In the mid-1980s it was fairly common for large Unix program
distributions to include elaborate custom shellscripts that would probe
their environment and use the information they gathered to construct
custom makefiles. These custom configurators reached absurd sizes. I
wrote one once that was 3000 lines of shell, about twice as large as any
single module in the program it was configuring — and this was not
unusual.

The community eventually said “Enough!” and various people set out to
write tools that would automate away part or all of the process of
maintaining makefiles. These tools generally tried to address two
issues:

One issue is <span class="emphasis">*portability*</span>. Makefile
generators are commonly built to run on many different hardware
platforms and Unix variants. They generally try to deduce things about
the local system (including everything from machine word size up to
which tools, languages, service libraries, and even document formatters
it has available). They then try to use those deductions to write
makefiles that exploit the local system's facilities and compensate for
its quirks.

The other issue is <span class="emphasis">*dependency
derivation*</span>. It's possible to deduce a great deal about the
dependencies of a collection of C sources by analyzing the sources
themselves (especially by looking at what include files they use and
share). Many makefile generators do this in order to mechanically
generate *make* dependencies.

Each different makefile generator tackles these objectives in a slightly
different way. Probably a dozen or more generators have been attempted,
but most proved inadequate or too difficult to drive or both, and only a
few are still in live use. We'll survey the major ones here. All are
available as open-source software on the Internet.

<div class="sect3" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

#### <span id="id2987736"></span>*makedepend*

</div>

</div>

Several small tools have tackled the rule automation part of the problem
exclusively. This one, distributed along with the X windowing system
from MIT<span id="id2987751" class="indexterm"></span>, is the fastest
and most useful and comes preinstalled under all modern Unixes,
including all Linuxes<span id="id2987761" class="indexterm"></span>.

*makedepend* takes a collection of C<span id="id2987780"
class="indexterm"></span> sources and generates dependencies for the
corresponding `.o` files from their `#include` directives. These can be
appended directly to a makefile, and in fact makedepend is defined to do
exactly that.

*makedepend* is useless for anything but C projects. It doesn't try to
solve more than one piece of the makefile-generation problem. But what
it does it does quite well.

*makedepend* is sufficiently documented by its manual page. If you type
**man makedepend** at a terminal window you will quickly learn what you
need to know about invoking it.

</div>

<div class="sect3" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

#### <span id="id2987839"></span>*Imake*

</div>

</div>

*Imake* was written in an attempt to mechanize makefile generation for
the X window system<span id="id2987858" class="indexterm"></span>. It
builds on *makedepend* to tackle both the dependency-derivation and
portability problems.

*Imake* system effectively replaces conventional makefiles with
Imakefiles. These are written in a more compact and powerful notation
which is (effectively) compiled into makefiles. The compilation uses a
rules file which is system-specific and includes a lot of information
about the local environment.

*Imake* is well suited to X's particular portability and configuration
challenges and universally used in projects that are part of the X
distribution. However, it has not achieved much popularity outside the X
developer community. It's hard to learn, hard to use, hard to extend,
and produces generated makefiles of mind-numbing size and complexity.

The *Imake* tools will be available on any Unix that supports X,
including Linux<span id="id2987918" class="indexterm"></span>. There has
been one heroic effort \[[DuBois](apb.html#DuBois "[DuBois]")\] to make
the mysteries of *Imake* comprehensible to non-X-programming mortals.
These are worth learning if you are going to do X programming.

</div>

<div class="sect3" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

#### <span id="id2987944"></span>*autoconf*

</div>

</div>

*autoconf* was written by people who had seen and rejected the *Imake*
approach. It generates per-project `configure` shellscripts that are
like the old-fashioned custom script configurators. These `configure`
scripts can generate makefiles (among other things).

*Autoconf* is focused on portability and does no built-in dependency
derivation at all. Although it is probably as complex as *Imake*, it is
much more flexible and easier to extend. Rather than relying on a
per-system database of rules, it generates `configure` shell code that
goes out and searches your system for things.

Each `configure` shellscript is built from a per-project template that
you have to write, called `configure.in`. Once generated, though, the
`configure` script will be self-contained and can configure your project
on systems that don't carry autoconf(1) itself.

The *autoconf* approach to makefile generation is like imake's in that
you start by writing a makefile template for your project. But
*autoconf*'s `Makefile.in` files are basically just makefiles with
placeholders in them for simple text substitution; there's no second
notation to learn. If you want dependency derivation, you must take
explicit steps to call makedepend(1) or some similar tool — or use
automake(1).

*autoconf* is documented by an on-line manual in the GNU *info* format.
The source scripts of autoconf are available from the
FSF<span id="id2988122" class="indexterm"></span> archive site, but are
also preinstalled on many Unix and Linux<span id="id2988132"
class="indexterm"></span> versions. You should be able to browse this
manual through your Emacs's help system.

Despite its lack of direct support for dependency derivation, and
despite its generally ad-hoc approach, in mid-2003 *autoconf* is clearly
the most popular of the makefile generators, and has been for some
years. It has eclipsed *Imake* and driven at least one major competitor
(*metaconfig*) out of use.

A reference, *GNU Autoconf, Automake and Libtool* is available
\[[Vaughan](apb.html#Vaughan "[Vaughan]")\]. We'll have more to say
about *autoconf*, from a slightly different angle, in
[Chapter 17](portabilitychapter.html "Chapter 17. Portability").

</div>

<div class="sect3" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

#### <span id="id2988205"></span>*automake*

</div>

</div>

*automake* is an attempt to add *Imake*-like dependency derivation as a
layer on top of autoconf(1). You write `Makefile.am` templates in a
broadly *Imake*-like notation; automake(1) compiles them to
`Makefile.in` files, which *autoconf*'s `configure` scripts then operate
on.

*automake* is still relatively new technology in mid-2003. It is used in
several FSF<span id="id2988299" class="indexterm"></span> projects but
has not yet been widely adopted elsewhere. While its general approach
looks promising, it is as yet rather brittle — it works when used in
stereotyped ways but tends to break badly if you try to do anything
unusual with it.

Complete on-line documentation is shipped with *automake*, which can be
downloaded from the FSF<span id="id2988324" class="indexterm"></span>
archive site.

</div>

</div>

<div class="footnotes">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch15s04.html#id2986827" id="ftn.id2986827">136</a>\]</sup>
<a href="http://www.tip.net.au/~millerp/rmch/recu-make-cons-harm.html"
target="_top">Available on the Web</a>.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch15s04.html#id2987288" id="ftn.id2987288">137</a>\]</sup>
A unit test is test code attached to a module to verify correct
performance. Use of the term ‘unit test’ suggests that the test is
written concurrently with the code by the developer of the code, and
implies a discipline in which module releases aren't considered complete
until they have attached test code. The term and the concept originated
in the “Extreme Programming” methodology popularized by Kent Beck, but
has gained wide acceptance among Unix programmers since about 2001.

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="navfooter">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|  |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="ch15s03.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | <a href="toolschapter.html" accesskey="u">Up</a> |  <a href="ch15s05.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |
| Special-Purpose Code Generators  | <a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a> |  Version-Control Systems |

</div>