---
acquired_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_via: docling
expert: unix-expert
priority: P1
quality_grade: A
slug: ch17s02
subcategory: unix
tags:
- unix
title: Ch17S02
word_count: 2381
---

<div class="navheader">

| Unix Standards |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="c_evolution.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | Chapter 17. Portability |  <a href="ietf_process.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="sect1" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

## <span id="id2994542"></span>Unix Standards

</div>

</div>

The 1973 rewrite of Unix in C<span id="id2994550"
class="indexterm"></span> made it unprecedentedly easy to port and
modify. As a result, the ancestral Unix diverged into a family of
operating systems early on. Unix standards originally developed to
reconcile the APIs of the different branches of the family tree.

The Unix standards that evolved after 1985 were quite successful at this
— so much so that they serve as valuable documentation of the API of
modern Unix implementations. In fact, real-world Unixes follow published
standards so closely that developers can (and frequently do) lean more
on documents like the POSIX specification than on the official manual
pages for the Unix variant they happen to be using.

In fact, on the newer open-source Unixes (such as
Linux<span id="id2994580" class="indexterm"></span>), it is common for
operating-system features to have been engineered using published
standards as the specification. We'll return to this point when we
examine the RFC standards process later in this chapter.

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2994594"></span>Standards and the Unix Wars

</div>

</div>

The original motivation for the development of Unix standards was the
split between the AT&T<span id="id2994604" class="indexterm"></span> and
Berkeley<span id="id2994613" class="indexterm"></span> lines of
development that we examined in
[Chapter 2](historychapter.html "Chapter 2. History").

The 4.x BSD Unixes were descended from the 1979 Version 7. After the
release of 4.1BSD in 1980 the BSD<span id="id2994636"
class="indexterm"></span> line quickly developed a reputation as the
cutting edge of Unix. Important additions included the
*vi*<span id="id2994651" class="indexterm"></span> visual editor, job
control facilities for managing multiple foreground and background tasks
from a single console, and improvements in signals (see
[Chapter 7](multiprogramchapter.html "Chapter 7. Multiprogramming")). By
far the most important addition was to be TCP/IP<span id="id2994672"
class="indexterm"></span> networking, but though Berkeley got the
contract to do it in 1980, TCP/IP was not to ship in an external release
for three years.

But another version, 1981's System III<span id="id2994687"
class="indexterm"></span>, became the basis of AT&T's later development.
System III reworked the Version 7 terminals interface into a cleaner and
more elegant form that was completely incompatible with the Berkeley
enhancements. It retained the older (non-resetting) semantics of signals
(again, see
[Chapter 7](multiprogramchapter.html "Chapter 7. Multiprogramming") for
discussion of this point). The January 1983 release of System V Release
1<span id="id2994710" class="indexterm"></span> incorporated some
BSD<span id="id2994719" class="indexterm"></span> utilities (such as
vi(1)).

The first attempt to bridge the gap came in February 1983 from UniForum,
an influential Unix user group. Their Uniforum 1983 Draft Standard (UDS
83) described a “core Unix System” consisting of a subset of the System
III<span id="id2994748" class="indexterm"></span> kernel and libraries
plus a file-locking primitive. AT&T<span id="id2994758"
class="indexterm"></span> declared support for UDS 83, but the standard
was an inadequate subset of evolving practice based on
4.1BSD<span id="id2994768" class="indexterm"></span>. The problem was
exacerbated by the July 1983 release of 4.2BSD, which added many new
features (including TCP/IP<span id="id2994778" class="indexterm"></span>
networking) and introduced some subtle incompatibilities with the
ancestral Version 7.

The 1984 divestiture of the Bell operating companies and the beginnings
of the Unix wars<span id="id2994794" class="indexterm"></span> (see
[Chapter 2](historychapter.html "Chapter 2. History")) significantly
complicated matters. Sun Microsystems<span id="id2994811"
class="indexterm"></span> was leading the workstation industry in a BSD
direction; AT&T was trying to get into the computer business and use
control of Unix as a strategic weapon even as it continued to license
the operating system to competitors like Sun. All the vendors were
making business decisions to differentiate their versions of Unix for
competitive advantage.

During the Unix wars<span id="id2994830" class="indexterm"></span>,
technical standardization became something that cooperating technical
people pushed for and most product managers accepted grudgingly or
actively resisted. The one large and important exception was
AT&T<span id="id2994843" class="indexterm"></span>, which declared its
intention to cooperate with user groups in setting standards when it
announced System V Release 2 (SVr2)<span id="id2994853"
class="indexterm"></span> in January 1984. The second revision of the
UniForum Draft Standard, in 1984, both tracked and influenced the API of
SVr2. Later Unix standards also tended to track System V except in areas
where BSD<span id="id2994865" class="indexterm"></span> facilities were
clearly functionally superior (thus, for example, modern Unix standards
describe the System V<span id="id2994876" class="indexterm"></span>
terminal controls rather than the BSD interface to the same facilities).

In 1985, AT&T<span id="id2994890" class="indexterm"></span> released the
*System V Interface Definition* (SVID). SVID provided a more formal
description of the SVr2 API, incorporating UDS 84. Later revisions SVID2
and SVID3 tracked the interfaces of System V releases 3 and 4. SVID
became the basis for the POSIX standards, which ultimately tipped most
of the Berkeley/AT&T disputes over system and C<span id="id2994908"
class="indexterm"></span> library calls in AT&T's favor.

But this would not become obvious for a few years yet; meanwhile, the
Unix wars<span id="id2994934" class="indexterm"></span> raged on. For
example, 1985 saw the release of two competing API standards for file
system sharing over networks: Sun's<span id="id2994945"
class="indexterm"></span> Network File System (NFS) and
AT&T's<span id="id2994954" class="indexterm"></span> Remote File System
(RFS). Sun's NFS prevailed because Sun was willing to share not merely
specifications but open-source code with others.

The lesson of this success should have been all the more pointed because
on purely logical grounds RFS was the superior model. It supported
better file-locking semantics and better mapping among user identities
on different systems, and generally made an effort to get the finer
details of Unix file system semantics precisely right, unlike NFS. The
lesson was ignored, however, even when it was repeated in 1987 by the
open-source X windowing system's<span id="id2994977"
class="indexterm"></span> victory over Sun's proprietary Networked
Window System (NeWS).

After 1985 the main thrust of Unix standardization passed to the
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). The IEEE's 1003
committee developed a series of standards generally known as
POSIX<span id="id2994995"
class="indexterm"></span>.<sup>\[<a href="ch17s02.html#ftn.id2995003" id="id2995003">144</a>\]</sup>
These went beyond describing merely systems calls and
C<span id="id2995021" class="indexterm"></span> library facilities; they
specified detailed semantics of a shell and a minimum command set, and
also detailed bindings for various non-C programming languages. The
first release in 1990 was followed by a second edition in 1996. The
International Standards Organization adopted them as ISO/IEC 9945.

Key POSIX standards include the following:

<div class="variablelist">

<span class="term">1003.1 (released 1990)</span>  
Library procedures. Described the C system call API, much like Version 7
except for signals and the terminal-control interface.

<span class="term">1003.2 (released 1992)</span>  
Standard shell and utilities. Shell semantics strongly resemble those of
the System V Bourne shell.

<span class="term">1003.4 (released 1993)</span>  
Real-time Unix. Binary semaphores, process memory locking, memory-mapped
files, shared memory, priority scheduling, real-time signals, clocks and
timers, IPC message passing, synchronized I/O, asynchronous I/O,
real-time files.

In the 1996 Second Edition, 1003.4 was split into 1003.1b (real-time)
and 1003.1c (threads).

</div>

Despite being underspecified in a couple of key areas such as
signal-handling semantics and omitting BSD<span id="id2995116"
class="indexterm"></span> sockets, the original POSIX standards became
the basis of all later Unix standardization work. They are still cited
as an authority, albeit indirectly through references like *POSIX
Programmer's Guide* \[[Lewine](apb.html#Lewine "[Lewine]")\]. The de
facto Unix API standard is still “POSIX plus sockets”, with later
standards mainly adding features and specifying conformance in unusual
edge cases more closely.

The next player on the scene was X/Open (later renamed the Open Group),
a consortium of Unix vendors formed in 1984. Their X/Open Portability
Guides (XPGs) initially developed in parallel with the POSIX drafts,
then after 1990 the XPGs incorporated and extended POSIX. Unlike POSIX,
which attempted to capture a safe subset of all Unixes, the XPGs were
oriented more toward common practice at the leading edge; even XPG1 in
1985, spanning SVr2 and 4.2BSD, <span id="id2995157"
class="indexterm"></span> included sockets.

XPG2 in 1987 added a terminal-handling API that was essentially System V
curses(3). XPG3 in 1990 merged in the X11 API. XPG4 in 1992 mandated
full compliance with the 1989 ANSI C standard<span id="id2999235"
class="indexterm"></span>. XPG2, 3, and 4 were heavily concerned with
support of internationalization and described an elaborate API for
handling codesets and message catalogs.

In reading about Unix standards you might come across references to
“Spec 1170” (from 1993), “Unix 95” (from 1995) and “Unix 98” (from
1998). These were certification marks based on the X/Open standards;
they are now of historical interest only. But the work done on XPG4
turned into Spec 1170, which turned into the first version of the Single
Unix Specification (SUS).

In 1993 seventy-five systems and software vendors including every major
Unix company put a final end to the Unix wars<span id="id2999275"
class="indexterm"></span> when they declared backing for X/Open to
develop a common definition of Unix. As part of the arrangement, X/Open
acquired the rights to the Unix trademark. The merged standard became
Single Unix Standard version 1. It was followed in 1997 by a version 2.
In 1999 X/Open absorbed the POSIX activity.

In 2001, X/Open (now The Open Group) issued the
<a href="http://www.unix.org/version3/" target="_top">Single Unix
Standard version 3</a>. All the threads of Unix API standardization were
finally gathered into one bundle. This reflected facts on the ground;
the different varieties of Unix had re-converged on a common API. And,
at least among old-timers who remembered the turbulence of the 1980s,
there was much rejoicing.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2999310"></span>The Ghost at the Victory Banquet

</div>

</div>

There was, unfortunately, an awkward detail — the old-school Unix
vendors who had backed the effort were under severe pressure from the
new school of open-source Unixes, and were in some cases in the process
of abandoning (in favor of Linux<span id="id2999323"
class="indexterm"></span>) the proprietary Unixes for which they had
gone to so much effort to secure conformance.

The conformance testing needed to verify Single Unix Specification
conformance is an expensive proposition. It would need to be done on a
per-distribution basis, but is well out of the reach of most
distributors of open-source operating systems. In any case, Linux
changes so fast that any given release of a distribution would probably
be obsolete by the time it could get
certified.<sup>\[<a href="ch17s02.html#ftn.id2999345" id="id2999345">145</a>\]</sup>

Standards like the Single Unix Specification have not entirely lost
their relevance. They're still valuable guides for Unix implementers.
But how The Open Group and other institutions of the old-school Unix
standardization process will adapt to the rapid tempo of open-source
releases (and to the low- or zero-budget operation of open-source
development groups!) remains to be seen.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id2999366"></span>Unix Standards in the Open-Source World

</div>

</div>

In the mid-1990s, the open-source community began standardization
efforts of its own. These efforts built on the source-code-level
compatibility secured by POSIX<span id="id2999378"
class="indexterm"></span> and its descendants. Linux<span id="id2999387"
class="indexterm"></span>, in particular, had been written from scratch
in a way that depended on the availability of Unix API standards like
POSIX.<sup>\[<a href="ch17s02.html#ftn.id2999397" id="id2999397">146</a>\]</sup>

In 1998 Oracle ported its market-leading database product to Linux, in a
move that was rightly seen as a major breakthrough in Linux's mainstream
acceptance. The engineer in charge of the port provided a definitive
demonstration that API standards had done their job when he was asked by
a reporter what technical challenges Oracle had had to surmount. The
engineer's reply was “We typed ‘make’.”

The problem for the new-school Unixes, therefore, was not API
compatibility at the source-code level. Everybody took for granted the
ability to move source code between different Linux<span id="id2999433"
class="indexterm"></span>, BSD<span id="id2999442"
class="indexterm"></span>, and proprietary-Unix distributions without
more than a trivial amount of porting labor. The new problem was not
source compatibility but binary compatibility. For the ground under Unix
had shifted in a subtle way as a consequence of the triumph of commodity
PC hardware.

In the old days, each Unix had run on what was effectively its own
hardware platform. There was enough variety in processor instruction
sets and machine architectures that applications had to be ported at
source level to move at all. On the other hand, there were a relatively
few major Unix releases, each with relatively long service lifetimes.
Application vendors like Oracle could afford the cost of building and
shipping separate binary distributions for each of three or four
hardware/software combinations, because they could amortize the low cost
of source-code porting over large customer populations and a long enough
product life cycle.

But then the minicomputer and workstation vendors were swamped by
inexpensive 386-based supermicros, and open-source Unixes changed the
rules. Vendors found they no longer had a stable platform to ship their
binaries to.

The superficial problem, at first, was the large number of Unix
distributors — but as the Linux<span id="id2999486"
class="indexterm"></span> distribution market consolidated, it became
clear that the real issue was the rate of change over time. APIs were
stable, but the expected locations of system administrative files,
utility programs, and things like the prefix of the paths to user
mailbox names and system log files kept changing.

The first standards effort to develop within the new-school
Linux<span id="id2999505" class="indexterm"></span> and
BSD<span id="id2999514" class="indexterm"></span> community itself
(beginning in 1993) was the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS). This
was incorporated into the Linux Standards Base (LSB), which also
standardized an expected set of service libraries and helper
applications. Both standards became activities of the
<a href="http://www.freestandards.org/" target="_top">Free Standards
Group</a>, which by 2001 developed a role similar to X/Open's position
amidst the old-school Unix vendors.

</div>

<div class="footnotes">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch17s02.html#id2995003" id="ftn.id2995003">144</a>\]</sup>
The original 1986 trial-use standard was called IEEE-IX. The name
‘POSIX’ was suggested by Richard Stallman. The introduction to POSIX.1
says: “It is expected to be pronounced pahz-icks as in positive, not
poh-six, or other variations. The pronounciation has been published in
an attempt to promulgate a standardized way of referring to a standard
operating system interface”.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch17s02.html#id2999345" id="ftn.id2999345">145</a>\]</sup>
One Linux distributor, Lasermoon in Great Britain, did achieve POSIX.1
FIPS 151-2 certification — and went out of business, because potential
customers didn't care.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch17s02.html#id2999397" id="ftn.id2999397">146</a>\]</sup>
See *Just for Fun* \[[Torvalds](apb.html#Torvalds "[Torvalds]")\] for
discussion.

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="navfooter">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|  |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="c_evolution.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | <a href="portabilitychapter.html" accesskey="u">Up</a> |  <a href="ietf_process.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |
| Evolution of C  | <a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a> |  IETF and the RFC Standards Process |

</div>