---
acquired_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_via: docling
expert: unix-expert
priority: P1
quality_grade: A
slug: ch19s01
subcategory: unix
tags:
- unix
title: Ch19S01
word_count: 1151
---

<div class="navheader">

| Unix and Open Source |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="opensourcechapter.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | Chapter 19. Open Source |  <a href="ch19s02.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="sect1" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

## <span id="id3009499"></span>Unix and Open Source

</div>

</div>

Open-source development exploits the fact that characterizing and fixing
bugs — unlike, say, implementing a particular algorithm — is a task that
lends itself well to being split into multiple parallel subtasks.
Exploration of the neighborhood of possibilities near a prototype design
also parallelizes well. With the right technological and social
machinery in place, development teams that are loosely networked and
very large can do astoundingly good work.

Astoundingly, that is, if you are carrying around the mental habits
developed by people who treat process secrecy and proprietary control as
a given. From *The Mythical Man-Month*
\[[Brooks](apb.html#Brooks "[Brooks]")\] until the rise of
Linux<span id="id3009532" class="indexterm"></span>, the orthodoxy in
software engineering was all about small, closely managed teams within
heavyweight organizations like corporations and government. The practice
was of <span class="emphasis">*large*</span> teams closely managed.

The early Unix community, before the AT&T<span id="id3009553"
class="indexterm"></span> divestiture, was a paradigmatic example of
open source in action. While the pre-divestiture Unix code was
technically and legally proprietary, it was treated as a commons within
its user/developer community. Volunteer efforts were self-directed by
the people most strongly motivated to solve problems. From these choices
many good things flowed. Indeed, the technique of open-source
development evolved as an unconscious folk practice in the Unix
community for more than a quarter century, many years before it was
analyzed and labeled in the late 1990s (See *The Cathedral and the
Bazaar* \[[Raymond01](apb.html#Raymond01 "[Raymond01]")\] and
*Understanding Open Source Software Development*
\[[Feller-Fitzgerald](apb.html#Feller-Fitzgerald "[Feller-Fitzgerald]")\].

In retrospect, it is rather startling how oblivious we all were to the
implications of our own behavior. Several people came very close to
understanding the phenomenon; Richard Gabriel in his “Worse Is
Better”<span id="id3009606" class="indexterm"></span> paper from 1990
\[[Gabriel](apb.html#Gabriel "[Gabriel]")\] is the best known, but one
can find prefigurations in Brooks
\[[Brooks](apb.html#Brooks "[Brooks]")\] (1975) and as far back as
Vyssotsky and Corbató's meditations on the Multics design (1965). I
failed to get it over more than twenty years of observing software
development, before being awakened by Linux in the mid-1990s. This
experience should make any thoughtful and humble person wonder what
other important unifying concepts are still implicit in our behavior and
lurking right under our collective noses, hidden not by their complexity
but by their very simplicity.

The rules of open-source development are simple:

<div class="orderedlist">

1.  <span class="emphasis">*Let the source be open.*</span> Have no
    secrets. Make the code and the process that produces it public.
    Encourage third-party peer review. Make sure that others can modify
    and redistribute the code freely. Grow the co-developer community as
    big as you can.

2.  <span class="emphasis">*Release early, release often.*</span> A
    rapid release tempo means quick and effective feedback. When each
    incremental release is small, changing course in response to
    real-world feedback is easier.

    Just make sure your first release builds, runs, and demonstrates
    promise. Usually, an initial version of an open-source program
    demonstrates promise by doing at least some portion of its final
    job, sufficient to show that the initiator can actually continue the
    project. For example, an initial version of a word processor might
    support typing in text and displaying it on the screen.

    A first release that cannot be compiled or run can kill a project
    (as, famously, almost happened to the Mozilla browser). Releases
    that cannot compile suggest that the project developers will be
    unable to complete the project, Also, non-working programs are
    difficult for other developers to contribute to, because they cannot
    easily determine if any change they made improved the program or
    not.

3.  <span class="emphasis">*Reward contribution with praise.*</span> If
    you can't give your co-developers material rewards, give
    psychological ones. Even if you can, remember that people will often
    work harder for reputation than they would for gold.

</div>

<div class="blockquote">

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
|   | A corollary of rule 2 is that individual releases should not be momentous events, with many promises attached and much preparation. It's important to ruthlessly streamline your release process, so that you <span class="emphasis">*can*</span> do frequent releases painlessly. A setup where all other work must stop during release preparation is a terrible mistake. (Notably, if you're using CVS or something similar, releases in preparation should be branches off the main line of development, so that they don't block main-line progress.) To sum up, don't treat releases as big special events; make them part of normal routine. |   |
| --<span class="attribution"> <span class="author">Henry Spencer</span> <span id="id3007670" class="indexterm"></span> </span> |  |   |

</div>

Remember that the reason for frequent releases is to shorten and speed
the feedback loop connecting your user population to your developers.
Therefore, resist thinking of the next release as a polished jewel that
cannot ship until everything is perfect. Don't make long wish lists.
Make progress incrementally, admit and advertise current bugs, and have
confidence that perfection will come with time. Accept that you will go
through dozens of point releases on the way, and don't get upset as the
version numbers mount.

Open-source development uses large teams of programmers distributed over
the Internet and communicating primarily through email and Web
documents. Typically, most contributors to any given project are
volunteers contributing in order to be rewarded by the increased
usefulness of the software to them, and by reputation incentives. A
central individual or core group steers the project; other contributors
may drop in and drop out sporadically. To encourage casual contributors,
it is important to avoid erecting social barriers between them and the
core team. Minimize the core team's privileged status, and work hard to
keep the boundaries inconspicuous.

Open-source projects follow the Unix-tradition advice of automating
wherever possible. They use the patch(1) tool to pass around incremental
changes. Many projects (and all large ones) have network-accessible code
repositories using version-control systems like CVS (recall the
discussion in [Chapter 15](toolschapter.html "Chapter 15. Tools")). Use
of automated bug- and patch-tracking systems is also common.

In 1997, almost nobody outside the hacker culture understood that it was
even possible to run a large project this way, let alone get
high-quality results. In 2003 this is no longer news; projects like
Linux<span id="id3007763" class="indexterm"></span>,
Apache<span id="id3007775" class="indexterm"></span>, and Mozilla have
achieved both success and high public visibility.

Abandoning the habit of secrecy in favor of process
transparency<span id="id3007790" class="indexterm"></span> and peer
review was the crucial step by which alchemy became chemistry. In the
same way, it is beginning to appear that open-source development may
signal the long-awaited maturation of software development as a
discipline.

</div>

<div class="navfooter">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|  |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="opensourcechapter.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | <a href="opensourcechapter.html" accesskey="u">Up</a> |  <a href="ch19s02.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |
| Chapter 19. Open Source  | <a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a> |  Best Practices for Working with Open-Source Developers |

</div>