---
acquired_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_via: docling
expert: unix-expert
priority: P1
quality_flags:
- too_short (737 words)
quality_grade: C
slug: ch19s05
subcategory: unix
tags:
- unix
title: Ch19S05
word_count: 737
---

<div class="navheader">

| Varieties of Open-Source Licensing |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="ch19s04.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | Chapter 19. Open Source |  <a href="futurechapter.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="sect1" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

## <span id="id3014854"></span>Varieties of Open-Source Licensing

</div>

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3014860"></span>MIT or X Consortium License

</div>

</div>

The loosest kind of free-software license is one that grants
unrestricted rights to copy, use, modify, and redistribute modified
copies as long as a copy of the copyright and license terms is retained
in all modified versions. But when you accept this license you do give
up the right to sue the maintainers.

You can find a template for the standard X Consortium license at the
<a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.html"
target="_top">OSI site</a>.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3014890"></span>BSD Classic License

</div>

</div>

The next least restrictive kind of license grants unrestricted rights to
copy, use, modify, and redistribute modified copies as long as a copy of
the copyright and license terms is retained in all modified versions,
and an acknowledgment is made in advertising or documentation associated
with the package. Grantee has to give up the right to sue the
maintainers.

The original BSD license is the best-known license of this kind. Among
parts of the free-software culture that trace their lineages back to BSD
Unix<span id="id3014913" class="indexterm"></span>, this license is used
even on a lot of free software that was written thousands of miles from
Berkeley<span id="id3014923" class="indexterm"></span>.

It is also not uncommon to find minor variants of the BSD license that
change the copyright holder and omit the advertising requirement (making
it effectively equivalent to the MIT license). Note that in mid-1999 the
Office of Technology Transfer of the University of California rescinded
the advertising clause in the BSD license. So the license on the BSD
software has been relaxed in exactly this way. Should you choose the BSD
approach, we strongly recommend that you use the new license (without
advertising clause) rather than the old. That requirement was dropped
because it led to significant legal and procedural complications over
what constituted advertising.

You can find a BSD license template at the
<a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.html"
target="_top">OSI site</a>.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3014963"></span>Artistic License

</div>

</div>

The next most restrictive kind of license grants unrestricted rights to
copy, use, and locally modify. It allows redistribution of modified
binaries, but restricts redistribution of modified sources in ways
intended to protect the interests of the authors and the free-software
community.

The Artistic License, devised for Perl<span id="id3014982"
class="indexterm"></span> and widely used in the Perl developer
community, is of this kind. It requires modified files to contain
“prominent notice” that they have been altered. It also requires people
who redistribute changes to make them freely available and make efforts
to propagate them back to the free-software community.

You can find a copy of the Artistic License at the
<a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/artistic-license.html"
target="_top">OSI site</a>.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015011"></span>General Public License

</div>

</div>

The GNU General Public License (and its derivative, the Library or
“Lesser” GPL) is the single most widely used free-software license. Like
the Artistic License, it allows redistribution of modified sources
provided the modified files bear “prominent notice”.

The GPL requires that any program containing parts that are under GPL be
wholly GPLed. (The exact circumstances that trigger this requirement are
not perfectly clear to everybody.)

These extra requirements actually make the GPL more restrictive than any
of the other commonly used licenses. (Larry Wall developed the Artistic
License to avoid them while serving many of the same objectives.)

You can find a pointer to the GPL, and instructions about how to apply
it, at
<a href="http://www.gnu.org/copyleft.html" target="_top">FSF copyleft
site</a><span id="id3015052" class="indexterm"></span>.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015063"></span>Mozilla Public License

</div>

</div>

The Mozilla Public License supports software that is open source, but
may be linked with closed-source modules or extensions. It requires that
the distributed software ("Covered Code") remain open, but permits
add-ons called through a defined API to remain closed.

You can find a template for the MPL at the
<a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/MPL-1.1.html"
target="_top">OSI site</a>.

</div>

</div>

<div class="navfooter">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|  |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="ch19s04.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | <a href="opensourcechapter.html" accesskey="u">Up</a> |  <a href="futurechapter.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |
| Why You Should Use a Standard License  | <a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a> |  Chapter 20. Futures |

</div>