---
acquired_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_via: docling
expert: unix-expert
priority: P1
quality_grade: A
slug: ch20s03
subcategory: unix
tags:
- unix
title: Ch20S03
word_count: 3058
---

<div class="navheader">

| Problems in the Design of Unix |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="plan9.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | Chapter 20. Futures |  <a href="ch20s04.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="sect1" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

## <span id="id3015510"></span>Problems in the Design of Unix

</div>

</div>

Plan 9 cleans up Unix, but only really adds one new concept (private
namespaces) to its basic set of design ideas. But are there serious
problems with those basic design ideas? In
[Chapter 1](philosophychapter.html "Chapter 1. Philosophy") we touched
on several issues that Unix arguably got wrong. Now that the open-source
movement has put the design future of Unix back in the hands of
programmers and technical people, these are no longer decisions we have
to live with forever. We'll reexamine them in order to get a better
handle on how Unix might evolve in the future.

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015538"></span>A Unix File Is Just a Big Bag of Bytes

</div>

</div>

A Unix file is just a big bag of bytes, with no other attributes. In
particular, there is no capability to store information about the file
type or a pointer to an associated application program outside the
file's actual data.

More generally, everything is a byte stream<span id="id3015556"
class="indexterm"></span>; even hardware devices are byte streams. This
metaphor was a tremendous success of early Unix, and a real advance over
a world in which (for example) compiled programs could not produce
output that could be fed back to the compiler. Pipes<span id="id3015569"
class="indexterm"></span> and shell programming<span id="id3015577"
class="indexterm"></span> sprang from this metaphor.

But Unix's byte-stream metaphor is <span class="emphasis">*so*</span>
central that Unix has trouble integrating software objects with
operations that don't fit neatly into the byte stream or file repertoire
of operations (create, open, read, write, delete). This is especially a
problem for GUI objects such as icons, windows, and ‘live’ documents.
Within a classical Unix model of the world, the only way to extend the
everything-is-a-byte-stream metaphor is through `ioctl` calls, a
notoriously ugly collection of back doors into kernel space.

Fans of the Macintosh<span id="id3015618" class="indexterm"></span>
family of operating systems tend to be vociferous about this. They
advocate a model in which a single filename may have both data and
resource ‘forks’, the data fork corresponding to the Unix byte stream
and the resource fork being a collection of name/value pairs. Unix
partisans prefer approaches that make file data self-describing so that
effectively the same sort of metadata is stored within the file.

The problem with the Unix approach is that every program that writes the
file has to know about it. Thus, for example, if we want the file to
carry type information inside it, every tool that touches it has to take
care to either preserve the type field unaltered or interpret and then
rewrite it. While this would be theoretically possible to arrange, in
practice it would be far too fragile.

On the other hand, supporting file attributes raises awkward questions
about which file operations should preserve them. It's clear that a copy
of a named file to another name should copy the source file's attributes
as well as its data — but suppose we cat(1) the file, redirecting the
output of cat(1) to a new name?

The answer to this question depends on whether the attributes are
actually properties of filenames or are in some magical way bundled with
the file's data as a sort of invisible preamble or postamble. Then the
question becomes: Which operations make the properties visible?

Xerox PARC<span id="id3015686" class="indexterm"></span> file-system
designs grappled with this problem as far back as the 1970s. They had an
‘open serialized’ call that returned a byte stream containing both
attributes and content. If applied to a directory, it returned a
serialization of the directory's attributes plus the serialization of
all the files in it. It is not clear that this approach has ever been
bettered.

Linux 2.5<span id="id3015706" class="indexterm"></span> already supports
attaching arbitrary name/value pairs as properties of a filename, but at
time of writing this capability is not yet much used by applications.
Recent versions of Solaris have a roughly equivalent feature.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015724"></span>Unix Support for GUIs Is Weak

</div>

</div>

The Unix experience proves that using a handful of metaphors as the
basis for a framework is a powerful strategy (recall the discussion of
frameworks and shared context in
[Chapter 13](complexitychapter.html "Chapter 13. Complexity")). The
visual metaphor at the heart of modern GUIs (files represented by icons,
and opened by clicking which invokes some designated handler program,
typically able to create and edit these files) has proven both
successful and long-lived, exerting a strong hold on users and interface
designers ever since Xerox PARC<span id="id3015747"
class="indexterm"></span> pioneered it in the 1970s.

Despite considerable recent effort, in 2003 Unix still supports this
metaphor only poorly and grudgingly — there are lots of layers, few
conventions, and only weak construction utilities. A typical reaction
from a Unix old hand is to suspect that this reflects deeper problems
with the GUI metaphor itself.

<div class="blockquote">

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
|   | I think part of the problem is that we still don't have the metaphor right. For example, on the Mac I drag a file to the trashcan to delete it, but when I drag it to a disc it gets copied, and can't drag it to a printer icon to print it because that's done through the menus. I could go on and on. It's like files were in OS/360, before Unix came along with its simple (but not too simple), file idea. |   |
| --<span class="attribution"> <span class="author">Steve Johnson</span> <span id="id3015781" class="indexterm"></span> </span> |  |   |

</div>

We quoted Brian Kernighan and Mike Lesk to similar effect in
[Chapter 11](interfacechapter.html "Chapter 11. Interfaces"). But the
inquiry can't stop with indicting the GUI, because with all its flaws
there is tremendous demand for GUIs from end users. Supposing we could
get the metaphor right at the level of the design of user interactions,
would Unix be capable of supporting it gracefully?

The answer is: probably not. We touched on this problem in considering
whether the bag-of-bytes model is adequate. Macintosh-style file
attributes may help provide the mechanism for richer support of GUIs,
but it seems very unlikely that they are the whole answer. Unix's object
model doesn't include the right fundamental constructs. We need to think
through what a really strong framework for GUIs would be like — and,
just as importantly, how it can be integrated with the existing
frameworks of Unix. This is a hard problem, demanding fundamental
insights that have yet to emerge from the noise and confusion of
ordinary software engineering or academic research.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015838"></span>File Deletion Is Forever

</div>

</div>

People with VMS<span id="id3015847" class="indexterm"></span>
experience, or who remember TOPS-20<span id="id3015856"
class="indexterm"></span> often miss these systems' file-versioning
facilities. Opening an existing file for write or deleting it actually
renamed it in a predictable way including a version number; only an
explicit removal operation on a version file actually erased data.

Unix does without this, at a not inconsiderable cost in user irritation
when the wrong files get deleted through a typo or unexpected effects of
shell wildcarding.

There does not seem to be any foreseeable prospect that this will change
at the operating system level. Unix developers like clear, simple
operations that do what the user tells them to do, even if the user's
instructions could amount to commanding “shoot me in the foot”. Their
instinct is to say that protecting the user from himself should be done
at the GUI or application level, not in the operating system.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015895"></span>Unix Assumes a Static File System

</div>

</div>

Unix has, in one sense, a very static model of the world. Programs are
implicitly assumed to run only briefly, so the background of files and
directories can be assumed static during their execution. There is no
standard, well-established way to ask the system to notify an
application if and when a specified file or directory changes. This
becomes a significant issue when writing long-lived user-interface
software which wants to know about changes to the background.

Linux has file- and directory-change notification
features,<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#ftn.id3015918" id="id3015918">156</a>\]</sup>
and some versions of BSD have copied them, but these are not yet
portable to other Unixes.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3015943"></span>The Design of Job Control Was Badly Botched

</div>

</div>

Apart from the ability to suspend processes (in itself a trivial
addition to the scheduler which could be made fairly inoffensive) what
job control is about is switching a terminal among multiple processes.
Unfortunately, it does the easiest part — deciding where keystrokes go —
and punts all the hard parts, like saving and restoring the state of the
screen, to the application.

A really good implementation of such a facility would be completely
invisible to user processes: no dedicated signals, no need to save and
restore terminal modes, no need for the applications to redraw the
screen at random times. The model ought to be a virtual keyboard that is
sometimes connected to the real one (and blocks you if you ask for input
when it isn't connected) and a virtual screen which is sometimes visible
on the real one (and might or might not block on output when it's not),
with the system doing the multiplexing in the same way it multiplexes
access to the disk, the processor, etc... and no impact on user programs
at
all.<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#ftn.id3015976" id="id3015976">157</a>\]</sup>

Doing it right would have required the Unix tty driver to track the
entire current screen state rather than just maintaining a line buffer,
and to know about terminal types at kernel level (possibly with help
from a daemon process) so it could do restores properly when a suspended
process is foregrounded again. A consequence of doing it wrong is that
the Unix kernel can't detach a session, such as an *xterm* or *Emacs*
job, from one terminal and re-attach it to another (which could be of a
different type).

As Unix usage has shifted to X displays and terminal emulators, job
control has become relatively less important, and this issue does not
have quite the force it once did. It is still annoying that there is no
suspend/attach/detach, however; this feature could be useful for saving
the state of terminal sessions between logins.

A common open-source program called screen(1) solves several of these
problems.<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#ftn.id3016047" id="id3016047">158</a>\]</sup>
However, since it has to be called explicitly by the user, its
facilities are not guaranteed to be present in every terminal session;
also, the kernel-level code that overlaps with it in function has not
been removed.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3016077"></span>The Unix API Doesn't Use Exceptions

</div>

</div>

C lacks a facility for throwing named exceptions with attached
data.<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#ftn.id3016087" id="id3016087">159</a>\]</sup>
Thus, the C functions in the Unix API indicate errors by returning a
distinguished value (usually −1 or a NULL character pointer) and setting
a global errno variable.

In retrospect, this is the source of many subtle errors. Programmers in
a hurry often neglect to check return values. Because no exception is
thrown, the Rule of Repair is violated; program flow continues until the
error condition manifests as some kind of failure or data corruption
later in execution.

The absence of exceptions also means that some tasks which ought to be
simple idioms — like aborting from a signal handler on a version with
Berkeley-style signals — have to be performed with code that is complex,
subject to portability glitches, and bug-prone.

This problem can be (and normally is) hidden by bindings of the Unix API
in languages such as Python or Java that have exceptions.

The lack of exceptions is actually an indicator of a problem with larger
immediate implications; C's weak type ontology makes communication
between higher-level languages implemented in it problematic. Most of
the more modern languages, for example, have lists and dictionaries as
primary data types — but, because these don't have any canonical
representation in the universe of C, attempting to pass lists between
(say) Perl and Python is an unnatural act requiring a lot of glue.

There are technologies that address the larger problem, such as CORBA,
but they tend to involve a lot of runtime translation and be
unpleasantly heavyweight.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3016155"></span>ioctl(2) and fcntl(2) Are an Embarrassment

</div>

</div>

The ioctl(2) and fcntl(2) mechanisms provide a way to write hooks into a
device driver. The original, historical use of ioctl(2) was to set
parameters like baud rate and number of framing bits in a
serial-communications driver, thus the name (for ‘I/O control’). Later,
ioctl calls were added for other driver functions, and fcntl(2) was
added as a hook into the file system.

Over the years, `ioctl` and `fcntl` calls have proliferated. They are
often poorly documented, and often a source of portability problems as
well. With each one comes a grubby pile of macro definitions describing
operation types and special argument values.

The underlying problem is the same as ‘big bag of bytes’; Unix's object
model is weak, leaving no natural places to put many auxiliary
operations. Designers have an untidy choice among unsatisfactory
alternatives; `fcntl`/`ioctl` going through devices in `/dev`, new
special-purpose system calls, or hooks through special-purpose virtual
file systems that hook into the kernel (e.g. `/proc` under Linux and
elsewhere).

It is not clear whether or how Unix's object model will be enriched in
the future. If MacOS-like file attributes become a common feature of
Unix, tweaking magic named attributes on device drivers may take over
the role `ioctl`/`fcntl` now have (this would at least have the merit of
not requiring piles of macro definitions before the interface could be
used). We've already seen that Plan 9, which uses the named file server
or file system as its basic object, rather than the file/bytestream,
presents another possible path.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3019078"></span>The Unix Security Model May Be Too Primitive

</div>

</div>

Perhaps root is too powerful, and Unix should have finer-grained
capabilities or ACLs (Access Control Lists) for system-administration
functions, rather than one superuser that can do anything. People who
take this position argue that too many system programs have permanent
root privileges through the set-user-ID mechanism; if even one can be
compromised, intrusions everywhere will follow.

This argument is weak, however. Modern Unixes allow any given user
account to belong to multiple security groups. Through use of the
execute-permission and set-group-ID bits on program executables, each
group can in effect function as an ACL for files or programs.

This theoretical possibility is very little used, however, suggesting
that the demand for ACLs is much less in practice than it is in theory.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3019113"></span>Unix Has Too Many Different Kinds of Names

</div>

</div>

Unix unified files and local devices — they're all just byte streams.
But network devices accessed through sockets have different semantics in
a different namespace. Plan 9 <span id="id3019125"
class="indexterm"></span> demonstrates that files can be smoothly
unified with both local and remote (network) devices, and all of these
things can be managed through a namespace that is dynamically adjustable
per-user and even per-program.

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3019140"></span>File Systems Might Be Considered Harmful

</div>

</div>

Was having a file system at all the wrong thing? Since the late 1970s
there has been an intriguing history of research into persistent object
stores and operating systems that don't have a shared global file system
at all, but rather treat disk storage as a huge swap area and do
everything through virtualized object pointers.

Modern efforts in this line (such as EROS<span id="id3019160"
class="indexterm"></span><sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#ftn.id3019167" id="id3019167">160</a>\]</sup>)
hint that such designs can offer large benefits including both provable
conformance to a security policy and higher performance. It must be
noted, however, that if this is a failure of Unix, it is equally a
failure of all of its competitors; no major production operating system
has yet followed EROS's
lead.<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#ftn.id3019184" id="id3019184">161</a>\]</sup>

</div>

<div class="sect2" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

### <span id="id3019193"></span>Towards a Global Internet Address Space

</div>

</div>

Perhaps URLs don't go far enough. We'll leave the last word on possible
future directions of Unix to Unix's inventor:

<div class="blockquote">

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
|   | My ideal for the future is to develop a file system remote interface (a la Plan 9) and then have it implemented across the Internet as the standard rather than HTML. That would be ultimate cool. |   |
| --<span class="attribution"> <span class="author">Ken Thompson</span> <span id="id3019220" class="indexterm"></span></span> |  |   |

</div>

</div>

<div class="footnotes">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#id3015918" id="ftn.id3015918">156</a>\]</sup>
Look for `F_NOTIFY` under fcntl(2).

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#id3015976" id="ftn.id3015976">157</a>\]</sup>
This paragraph is based on a 1984 analysis by Henry Spencer. He went on
to note that job control was necessary and appropriate for POSIX.1 and
later Unix standards to consider precisely
<span class="emphasis">*because*</span> it oozes its way into every
program, and hence has to be thought about in any application-to-system
interface. Hence, POSIX's endorsement of a mis-design, while proper
solutions were “out of scope” and hence were not even considered.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#id3016047" id="ftn.id3016047">158</a>\]</sup>
There is a project site for screen(1) at
<a href="http://www.math.fu-berlin.de/~guckes/screen/"
target="_top">http://www.math.fu-berlin.de/~guckes/screen/</a>.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#id3016087" id="ftn.id3016087">159</a>\]</sup>
For nonprogrammers, *throwing an exception* is a way for a program to
bail out in the middle of a procedure. It's not quite an exit because
the throw can be intercepted by catcher code in an enclosing procedure.
Exceptions are normally used to signal errors or unexpected conditions
that mean it would be pointless to try to continue normal processing.

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#id3019167" id="ftn.id3019167">160</a>\]</sup>
<a href="http://www.eros-os.org/"
target="_top">http://www.eros-os.org/</a>

</div>

<div class="footnote">

<sup>\[<a href="ch20s03.html#id3019184" id="ftn.id3019184">161</a>\]</sup>
The operating systems of the Apple Newton, the AS/400 minicomputer and
the Palm handheld could be considered exceptions.

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="navfooter">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|  |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="plan9.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | <a href="futurechapter.html" accesskey="u">Up</a> |  <a href="ch20s04.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |
| Plan 9: The Way the Future Was  | <a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a> |  Problems in the Environment of Unix |

</div>