---
acquired_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_date: '2026-04-22'
converted_via: docling
expert: unix-expert
priority: P1
quality_flags:
- too_short (376 words)
quality_grade: C
slug: pr01s01
subcategory: unix
tags:
- unix
title: Pr01S01
word_count: 376
---

<div class="navheader">

| Who Should Read This Book |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="preface.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | Preface |  <a href="pr01s02.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="sect1" lang="en">

<div class="titlepage">

<div>

## <span id="id2871770"></span>Who Should Read This Book

</div>

</div>

You should read this book if you are an experienced Unix programmer who
is often in the position of either educating novice programmers or
debating partisans of other operating systems, and you find it hard to
articulate the benefits of the Unix approach.

You should read this book if you are a C, C++, or Java programmer with
experience on other operating systems and you are about to start a
Unix-based project.

You should read this book if you are a Unix user with novice-level up to
middle-level skills in the operating system, but little development
experience, and want to learn how to design software effectively under
Unix.

You should read this book if you are a non-Unix programmer who has
figured out that the Unix tradition might have something to teach you.
We believe you're right, and that the Unix philosophy can be exported to
other operating systems. So we will pay more attention to non-Unix
environments (especially Microsoft operating systems) than is usual in a
Unix book; and when tools and case studies are portable, we say so.

You should read this book if you are an application architect
considering platforms or implementation strategies for a major
general-market or vertical application. It will help you understand the
strengths of Unix as a development platform, and of the Unix tradition
of open source as a development method.

You should <span class="emphasis">*not*</span> read this book if what
you are looking for is the details of C coding or how to use the Unix
kernel API. There are many good books on these topics; *Advanced
Programming in the Unix Environment*
\[[Stevens92](apb.html#Stevens92 "[Stevens92]")\] is classic among
explorations of the Unix API, and *The Practice of Programming*
\[[Kernighan-Pike99](apb.html#Kernighan-Pike99 "[Kernighan-Pike99]")\]
is recommended reading for all C programmers (indeed for all programmers
in any language).

</div>

<div class="navfooter">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|  |  |  |
|:---|:--:|---:|
| <a href="preface.html" accesskey="p">Prev</a>  | <a href="preface.html" accesskey="u">Up</a> |  <a href="pr01s02.html" accesskey="n">Next</a> |
| Preface  | <a href="index.html" accesskey="h">Home</a> |  How to Use This Book |

</div>